.. _community:

=========
Community
=========

Lino has a growing community made up of many different people.

A **consultant** is somebody who knows the possibilities and
limitations of the Lino framework. They can give you professional
advice about whether or not to choose Lino as a solution for your
needs.

A **site owner** is somebody who decides to run a *Lino site*.  A
**Lino site** is when a Lino application runs on an Internet server so
that its users can access it.

A **user** is somebody who uses a given *Lino site* for their daily
work. As a Lino user you should know how to contact your *support
provider*. Lino users have their own section here, the :doc:`User's
Guide </user/index>`.

A **support provider** is somebody who helps users if they have a
question. The support provider is always available when users need
them.  If they cannot help directly, then they know how to ask either
the *system administrator* ot the *application developer*.

A **system administrator** is somebody who runs a *Lino site* and
helps users to connect to that site.  A **hosting provider** does the
same, but as a third-party company and not as employee of the same
organization. See the :doc:`Administrator's Guide </admin/index>`.

An **application developer** is somebody who writes or maintains Lino
applications.
 
An **analyst** is somebody who collaborates with users in order to
analyze their needs, and who then explains to the *application
developer* how to make the application better (or how to make it at
all, in case of new development projects).

A **trainer** is somebody who can explain a given Lino application to
its users. Trainers also write documentation for users.


.. _get_involved:

Get involved!
=============

Here are some profiles of people we happily welcome.

Individuals:

- **Anybody** -- consider learning one or several Lino applications in
  order to work as a trainer or analyst.

- **System administrators** -- consider installing a Lino application
  for your employer. See :doc:`admins`.
  
- **Python developers** -- consider whether Lino is the right tool
  for one of your projects. See :doc:`developers`.

Companies:

- **IT solution providers** -- Consider becoming a
  Lino representative.  Tell other people about Lino.  Show the
  :ref:`demos` to other people and help them analyze whether they need
  a Lino application.  Set up your own demo server.

  We help you with planning your projects.
  
- **Internet hosting providers** -- Consider becoming a :doc:`Lino
  hosting provider </hosting/about>` and contact us to get listed in
  our :doc:`directory <hosters>`.


Who is behind Lino?
===================

The work of powering the Lino community is currently being done by
`Rumma & Ko <http://www.saffre-rumma.net>`_. Here is their statement
about community:

We are doing our best to help the Lino community becoming a big one,
but we have no plans of becoming *ourselves* big .  If the Lino
community would get bigger than we can manage, we recommend that it
should be governed by an independent organization which does not have
any private motivation on its own.  In order to open the door for this
evolution, we created the :doc:`Lino Team <team>`.


.. toctree::
    :hidden:

    developers
    /team/newbies
    admins
    hosters
    team
    get_involved
    structure
    
