.. include:: /../docs/shared/include/defs.rst
.. _book.changes.2021:

====
2021
====

This is the 2021 :term:`change log` for :ref:`book`. General information about
how to read and maintain this document in :ref:`dev.changes`.

2021-02-24
==========

Fixed :ticket:`3986`. New methods :meth:`get_request_detail_action
<lino.core.actors.Actor.get_request_detail_action>`  and
:meth:`lino.core.layouts.Layout.add_datasource` to fix a subtle problem in
:ref:`avanti`.  Also :attr:`Layout._other_datasources` is no longer a
:class:`set` but a :class:`list`. The case is covered in
:ref:`avanti.specs.get_request_detail_action`.


2021-02-23
==========

Released Lino 21.2.3 and XL 21.2.1 to PyPI (to fix issues like
`this one <https://gitlab.com/lino-framework/mentori/-/jobs/1047909420>`__).

2021-02-22
==========

.. currentmodule:: lino.modlib.uploads

Optimizations in :mod:`lino.modlib.uploads`: Added new
plugin options :attr:`remove_orphaned_files <Plugin.remove_orphaned_files>`
and :attr:`max_file_size <Plugin.max_file_size>`, and two
data checkers :class:`UploadChecker` and :class:`UploadsFolderChecker`.


2021-02-17
==========

API change: Rename :class:`lino.mixins.Uploadable` to
:class:`lino.modlib.uploads.mixins.UploadBase`.

Fixed a typo bug in :class:`renderer_mixin.JsCacheRenderer` which caused Lino to
create an empty media directory "upload" (instead of "uploads") at startup. This
bug might be the cause for missing group write permission of files that were
uploaded to a production site.  If you encounter this problem, check whether
your :xfile:`uploads` directory has the sticky group bit set.

2021-02-15
==========

Optimizations for developers: New :term:`django-admin command`
:manage:`demotest` increases test coverage.  Removed :class:`WebIndexTestCase`,
which is functionally included in :manage:`demotest`. Miscellaneous cleanup and
optimizations in the test suite. Removed Django 4 deprecation warnings.

Regression danger: :meth:`lino_react.react.views.ApiElement.post` no longer
passes `http.QueryDict(request.body)` but `request.POST` as data to
:func:`action_request <lino.core.views.action_request>`.

Release to Pypi: lino-21.2.2

2021-02-14
==========

Fixed :ticket:`3968` (extjs combobox doesn't submit empty value). It is possible
that this bugfix reopens :ticket:`3653` (Learning choosers don't work in React
front end).

2021-02-13
==========

Release to PyPI: Lino, XL and Avanti.

Minor bugfixes :  SignIn failed when :attr:`lino.core.site.Site.use_ip_dict` was
not `True`.  When :class:`lino.modli.memo.PreviewableChecker` was called with
--fix, it fixed the problems but didn't report how many problems were fixed.

Fixed a regression: Insert button was missing in
:class:`lino.modlib.comments.CommentsByRFC`. All comment table summaries are now
wrapped into :meth:`html_text <lino.core.requests.BaseRequest.html_text>`,
leading to better text styling under :mod:`lino.modlib.extjs`.

New feature: you can now set a new plugin setting
:attr:`lino.modlib.comments.Plugin.emotion_range` to either "business" (default)
or "social" to select between two alternative sets of emoticons. :ref:`avanti`
uses the new "social" range, :ref:`noi` the default "business" range.

.. currentmodule:: lino.utils.test

Extend :class:`WebIndexTestCase` to use :meth:`DemoTestCase.login` instead of
Django's client :meth:`force_login`.  So now the JavaScript files are being
built for each user type, and a typo bug like :message:`AttrDict instance has no
key 'ipdict'` (in Lino 21.2.0) would no longer go undetected.

Release to PyPI: Lino and Avanti.

2021-02-12
==========

Fixed a bug in :mod:`lino.modlib.ipdict` that caused it to not report when an IP
had been blacklisted.

2021-01-29
==========

Fixed :ticket:`3948`: Lino didn't behave correctly when (a) no weekday at all
was selected (which for Lino means "any weekday"), and (b) caused an internal
server error when no recursion rule was found. This was in the
:meth:`get_next_suggested_date` of a :class:`lino_xl.lib.cal.RecurrenceSet`.

Fixed :ticket:`3946`: When a partner is :class:`lino_xl.lib.lists.Member` of
some list, this is no longer a reason to refuse deleting the partner. When you
confirm to delete such a partner, the list memberships now get deleted as well
(in cascade).

The title of the :class:`lino_xl.lib.contacts.RolesByPerson` slave panel was
"Contact for of (name)", not very helpful.  Now it is "(name) is contact person
for". Added a custom :attr:`details_of_master_template
<lino.core.actor.Actor.details_of_master_template>`. Note that the custom
:attr:`label`, "Contact for" is also needed for situations where the master is
not known.


2021-01-17
==========

The `ipdict.Connections` table has been reimplemented as
:class:`lino.modlib.users.Sessions`.  It now uses :mod:`sessions <django.contrib.sessions>`
and therefore works also on sites with very many users. It also features a
"Kill" action to manually delete individual actions. :mod:`ipdict
<lino.modlib.ipdict>` is no longer used to show the list of active user
sessions.  The ipdict approach was not suitable for sites with very many users
because it stores every connection in an in-memory `dict`.  ipdict is used only
for detecting brute force attacks. It now removes every entry after a successful
authentication.

Internal changes: :class:`lino.core.auth.middleware.DeviceTypeMiddleware` has
been merged into :class:`lino.core.auth.middleware.WithUserMiddleware` because
it was inefficient to parse the request twice. :class:`BoundAction` has now a
:meth:`__str__` method, which is used by user warnings "No permission to run X".
Until now these warnings were irritating because the action name wasn't shown in
the browser.

2021-01-16
==========

New method :meth:`lino.modlib.ipdict.Plugin.pop_ip_record` removes an (ip
address, username) pair from the registry, and Lino uses this when receiving the
``user_logged_out`` signal.

2021-01-15
==========

.. currentmodule:: lino.api.doctest

Continued on :ticket:`1162` (A CMS using Lino). The
:mod:`lino_book.projects.cms` project now has some improvement. But it is not
finished. Internal changes: :func:`lino.core.dashboard.DashboardItem.render` now
yields html chunks instead of etree elements.  :func:`show_dashboard` and
:func:`show_menu` are now defined in :mod:`lino.api.doctest`, no longer as
methods of a request. The function :func:`lino.api.doctest.rst2menu` is now used
in :ref:`dev.admin_main`.

The menu of a multilingual site now shows the languages in the main menu, and
users can dynamically switch to another language than the on defined in their
preferences.


2021-01-08
==========

Fix #3921 (Journal entry mixes up debit and credit when creating the movements).
Fix #3924 (auto_compute_amount does not always work as expected).

Release to PyPI: XL 21.1.6.


2021-01-07
==========

Release to PyPI: Lino 21.1.1.

Optimizations: #3919 (No suggestions on clearable general account)
:meth:`FinancialVoucherItem.account_changed` didn't collect suggestions after
entering a clearable account.
#3920 (Lino registers the voucher even when exception happens).

Release to PyPI: Lino 21.1.2 and XL 21.1.5.

2021-01-06
==========

Release to PyPI: :ref:`xl` 21.1.3.

Fix some bugs in :mod:`lino_xl.lib.finan` : The choicelist for
FinancialVoucherItem.match didn't respect the suggest_future_vouchers settings
and therefore always showed all matches, including those that happen in the
future and won't get satisfied. Visible result: you select one of these matches,
but Lino then sets the field to blank. After selecting a partner, Lino didn't
suggest anything (because amount was 0.00, not None).
FillSuggestionsToVoucherItem caused an additional item to be created.

Release to PyPI: :ref:`xl` 21.1.4 and Lino 21.1.0

Fix :ticket:`3917` (Lino forgets the journal after saving a bank statement).

2021-01-05
==========

Miscellaneous minor optimizations for entering bank statements.
:class:`finan.DatedFinancialVoucherItem` now also fills the date field from
last_item_date. Trying to fix surprizing behaviour after
:class:`FillSuggestionsToVoucherItem`. Ledger movements in
:class:`ledger.MovementsByVoucher` are now ordered by :attr:`seqno`, i.e. by
their "natural" order of creation.

Fix a typo bug in :mod:`lino_xl.lib.cal` that caused Lino to no show anything in
cal.EntriesByGuest although the person was present in some calendar entry.

2021-01-03
==========

Add new item :attr:`vatless` to :class:`lino_xl.lib.vat.VatClasses`.

Fix :ticket:`3909`. After editing the entry_date of the last voucher of the
journal we don't want its number to increase.

2021-01-02
==========

Fix :ticket:`3906` (active_fields are disturbing for city and zip_code). In
:class:`lino_xl.lib.countries.CountryCity` the fields city and zip_code are no
longer :attr:`active_fields <lino.core.model.Model.active_fields>`.

Fix :ticket:`3905` (Purchase invoice from private person suggests VAT). This
was a bug in :mod:`lino_xl.lib.eevat` and :mod:`lino_xl.lib.bevat`.

Fix :ticket:`3907` (Cannot enter into "Expense" column of bank statement)

Release to PyPI: :ref:`xl` (2 versions)


2021-01-01
==========

Optimized column layout of :class:`lino_xl.lib.sales.InvoicesByJournal`.

Release to PyPI: :ref:`xl`.
