.. _lino.dev.extjs:

Debugging generated ExtJS Javascript code
=========================================

.. xfile:: linoweb.js

At server startup the :mod:`lino.modlib.extjs` user interface
generates a series of files named :file:`lino_PROFILE_LANG.js` which
contain the client side application logic.  The first part of this
file comes from a file :srcref:`lino/modlib/extjs/linoweb.js`, the
second part is purely generated from your models, tables, layouts and
actions.

When you modified your copy of :xfile:`linoweb.js` in order to debug
it, there are some pitfalls:

A **first pitfall** is that when you modify :xfile:`linoweb.js`, your
development server *does not automatically restart*. This is because
it watches only the `.py` files for changes.  A development server
constantly watches the timestamps of all Python source files and
reloads itself automatically if something has changed. This is a
convenient feature of Django which BTW works only in a developement
server, not e.g. when serving your site on a production server.
(Actually Django's `runserver
<https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.8/ref/django-admin/#runserver-port-or-address-port>`_
command also detects changes in Django templates, but
:xfile:`linoweb.js` is not a Django template.)

A quick workaround is that when I have modified my
:xfile:`linoweb.js`, I do some trivial change to some other `.py`
source file which causes the devserver to restart. After saving your
file, you will see in your Python console::

    INFO Done manage.py runserver (PID 15481)
    Validating models...
    INFO Started manage.py runserver (using lino_noi.projects.team.settings.demo) --> PID 15589
    0 errors found
    September 29, 2015 - 08:56:05
    Django version 1.6.11, using settings 'lino_noi.projects.team.settings.demo'
    Starting development server at http://127.0.0.1:8000/
    Quit the server with CONTROL-C.
    
To be a bit more elegant, you can use `touch` instead of actually
applying a trivial change::

    $ touch /your/repository/lino/lino/core/site.py
    
A **second pitfall** is that when the process restarted, Lino does not
yet create the :xfile:`lino_NNN_en.js` file. You must first hit
:kbd:`Ctrl-R` in your browser and watch for a next message in the
Python console::

  INFO Building /lino_cache/team/media/cache/js/lino_000_en.js ...

This is because Lino by default generates the Javascript cache file
*lazily*, i.e. only when there is an incoming request. You can change
this behaviour by setting :attr:`build_js_cache_on_startup
<lino.core.site.Site.build_js_cache_on_startup>` to `True`. But when
debugging this is not convenient because it causes Lino to generate
*all* Javascript files (one file per user type and language), which
can take quite some time.


And then there is **a third pitfall!** Lino does not correctly detect
*every* code source change. This is probably a bug. Lino seems to
watch only the source of those modules which were loaded when the
kernel started to startup. Observe the `code_mtime` attribute of
:class:`lino.core.kernel.Kernel` for details.  But that bug is not
important to explore since it occurs only on a development server. In
case of doubt, just watch whether the message :message:`INFO Building
/lino_cache/.../media/cache/js/lino_000_en.js` comes when you hit
:kbd:`Ctrl-R`. If it doesn't, then touch another code file.

